SUETONIUS THE 
            LIVES OF THE TWELVE CAESARS ~   THE 
            LIFE OF VESPASIAN   ~   1.       The 
              empire, which for a long time had been unsettled and, as it were, 
              drifting, through the usurpation and violent death of three emperors, 
              was at last taken in hand and given stability by the Flavian family. 
              This house was, it is true, obscure and without family portraits, 
              yet it was one of which our country had no reason whatever to be 
              ashamed, even though it is the general opinion that the penalty 
              which Domitian paid for his avarice and cruelty was fully merited.
                   Titus Flavius Petro, a burgher of 
              Reate and during the civil war a centurion or a volunteer veteran 
              on Pompey's side, fled from the field of Pharsalus and went home, 
              where after at last obtaining pardon and an honourable discharge, 
              he carried on the business of a collector of moneys. His son, surnamed 
              Sabinus (although some say that he was an ex-centurion of the first 
              grade; others that while still in command of a cohort he was retired 
              because of ill-health) took no part in military life, but farmed 
              the public tax of a fortieth in Asia. And there existed for some 
              time statues erected in his honour by the cities of Asia, inscribed 
              "To an honest tax-gatherer." Later he carried on a banking 
              business in the Helvetian country and there he died, survived by 
              his wife, Vespasia Polla, and by two of her children, of whom the 
              elder, Sabinus, rose to the rank of prefect of Rome, and the younger, 
              Vespasian, even to that of emperor. Polla, who was born of an honourable 
              family at Nursia, had for father Vespasius Pollio, thrice tribune 
              of the soldiers and prefect of the camp, while her brother became 
              a senator with the rank of praetor. There is moreover on the top 
              of a mountain, near the sixth milestone on the road from Nursia 
              to Spoletium, a place called Vespasiae, where many monuments of 
              the Vespasii are to be seen, affording strong proof of the renown 
              and antiquity of the house. I ought to add that some have bandied 
              about the report, that Petro's father came from the region beyond 
              the Po and was a contractor for the day-labourers who come regularly 
              every year from Umbria to the Sabine district, to till the fields; 
              but that he settled in the town of Reate and there married. Personally 
              I have found no evidence whatever of this, in spite of rather careful 
              investigation. 2.       Vespasian 
              was born in the Sabine country, in a small village beyond Reate, 
              called Falacrina, on the evening of the fifteenth day before the 
              Kalends of December, in the consulate of Quintus Sulpicius Camerinus 
              and Gaius Poppaeus Sabinus, five years before the death of Augustus. 
              He was brought up under the care of his paternal grandmother Tertulla 
              on her estates at Cosa. Therefore even after he became emperor he 
              used constantly to visit the home of his infancy, where the manor 
              house was kept in its original condition, since he did not wish 
              to miss anything which he was wont to see there; and he was so devoted 
              to his grandmother's memory that on religious and festival days 
              he always drank from a little silver cup that had belonged to her.
                   After assuming the garb of manhood 
              he for a long time made no attempt to win the broad stripe of senator, 
              though his brother had gained it, and only his mother could finally 
              induce him to sue for it. She at length drove him to it, but rather 
              by sarcasm than by entreaties or parental authority, since she constantly 
              taunted him with being his brother's footman.
                   He served in Thrace as tribune of 
              the soldiers; as quaestor was assigned by lot to the province of 
              Crete and Cyrene; became a candidate for the aedileship and then 
              for the praetorship, attaining the former only after one defeat 
              and then barely landing in the sixth place, but the latter on his 
              canvass and among the foremost. In his praetorship, to lose no opportunity 
              of winning the favour of Gaius, who was at odds with the senate, 
              he asked for special games because of the emperor's victory in Germany 
              and recommended as an additional punishment of the conspirators 
              that they be cast out unburied. He also thanked the emperor before 
              that illustrious body because he had deigned to honour him with 
              an invitation to dinner. 3.       Meanwhile 
              he took to wife Flavia Domitilla, formerly the mistress of Statilius 
              Capella, a Roman knight of Sabrata in Africa, a woman originally 
              only of Latin rank, but afterwards declared a freeborn citizen of 
              Rome in a suit before arbiters, brought by her father Flavius Liberalis, 
              a native of Ferentum and merely a quaestor's clerk. By her he had 
              three children, Titus, Domitian, and Domitilla. He outlived his 
              wife and daughter; in fact lost them both before he became emperor. 
              After the death of his wife he resumed his relations with Caenis, 
              freedwoman and amanuensis of Antonia, and formerly his mistress; 
              and even after he became emperor he treated her almost as a lawful 
              wife. 4.       In 
              the reign of Claudius he was sent in command of a legion to Germany, 
              through the influence of Narcissus; from there he was transferred 
              to Britain, where he fought thirty battles with the enemy. He reduced 
              to subjection two powerful nations, more than twenty towns, and 
              the island of Vectis, near Britain, partly under the leadership 
              of Aulus Plautius, the consular governor, and partly under that 
              of Claudius himself. For this he received the triumphal regalia, 
              and shortly after two priesthoods, besides the consulship, which 
              he held for the last two months of the year. The rest of the time 
              up to his proconsulate he spent in rest and retirement, through 
              fear of Agrippina, who still had a strong influence over her son 
              and hated any friend of Narcissus, even after the latter's death.
                   The chance of the lot then gave him 
              Africa, which he governed with great justice and high honour, save 
              that in a riot at Hadrumetum he was pelted with turnips. Certain 
              it is that he came back none the richer, for his credit was so nearly 
              gone that he mortgaged all his estates to his brother, and had to 
              resort to trading in mules to keep up his position; whence he was 
              commonly known as "the Muleteer." He is also said to have 
              been found guilty of squeezing two hundred thousand sesterces out 
              of a young man for whom he obtained the broad stripe against his 
              father's wish, and to have been severely rebuked in consequence.
                   On the tour through Greece, among 
              the companions of Nero, he bitterly offended the emperor by either 
              going out often while Nero was singing, or falling asleep, if he 
              remained. Being in consequence banished, not only from intimacy 
              with the emperor but even with his public receptions, he withdrew 
              to a little out-of-the-way town, until a province and an army were 
              offered him while he was in hiding and in fear of his life.
                   There had spread over all the Orient 
              an old and established belief, that it was fated at that time for 
              men coming from Judaea to rule the world. This prediction, referring 
              to the emperor of Rome, as afterwards appeared from the event, the 
              people of Judaea took to themselves; accordingly they revolted and 
              after killing their governor, they routed the consular ruler of 
              Syria as well, when he came to the rescue, and took one of his eagles. 
              Since to put down this rebellion required a considerable army with 
              a leader of no little enterprise, yet one to whom so great power 
              could be entrusted without risk, Vespasian was chosen for the task, 
              both as a man of tried energy and as one in no wise to be feared 
              because of the obscurity of his family and name. Therefore there 
              were added to the forces in Judaea two legions with eight divisions 
              of cavalry and ten cohorts. He took his elder son as one of his 
              lieutenants, and as soon as he reached his province he attracted 
              the attention of the neighbouring provinces also; for he at once 
              reformed the discipline of the army and fought one or two battles 
              with such daring, that in the storming of a fortress he was wounded 
              in the knee with a stone and received several arrows in his shield. 5.       While 
              Otho and Vitellius were fighting for the throne after the death 
              of Nero and Galba, he began to cherish the hope of imperial dignity, 
              which he had long since conceived because of the following portents.
                   On the suburban estate of the Flavii 
              an old oak tree, which was sacred to Mars, on each of the three 
              occasions when Vespasia was delivered suddenly put forth a branch 
              from its trunk, obvious indications of the destiny of each child. 
              The first was slender and quickly withered, and so too the girl 
              that was born died within the year; the second was very strong and 
              long and portended great success, but the third was the image of 
              a tree. Therefore their father Sabinus, so they say, being further 
              encouraged by an inspection of victims, announced to his mother 
              that a grandson had been born to her would be a Caesar. But she 
              only laughed, marvelling that her son should already be in his dotage, 
              while she was still of strong mind.
                   Later, when Vespasian was aedile, 
              Gaius Caesar, incensed at his neglect of his duty of cleaning the 
              streets, ordered that he be covered with mud, which the soldiers 
              accordingly heaped into the bosom of his purple-bordered toga; this 
              some interpreted as an omen that one day in some civil commotion 
              his country, trampled under foot and forsaken, would come under 
              his protection and as it were into his embrace.
                   Once when he was taking breakfast, 
              a stray dog brought in a human hand from the cross-roads and dropped 
              it under the table. Again, when he was dining, an ox that was ploughing 
              shook off its yoke, burst into the dining-room, and after scattering 
              the servants, fell at the very feet of Vespasian as he reclined 
              at table, and bowed its neck as if suddenly tired out. A cypress 
              tree, also, on his grandfather's farm was torn up by the roots, 
              without the agency of any violent storm, and thrown down, and on 
              the following day rose again greener and stronger than before.
                   He dreamed in Greece that the beginning 
              of good fortune for himself and his family would come as soon as 
              Nero had a tooth extracted; and on the next day it came to pass 
              that a physician walked into the hall and showed him a tooth which 
              he had just then taken out.
                   When he consulted the oracle of the 
              god of Carmel in Judaea, the lots were highly encouraging, promising 
              that whatever he planned or wished however great it might be, would 
              come to pass; and one of his high-born prisoners, Josephus by name, 
              as he was being put in chains, declared most confidently that he 
              would soon be released by the same man, who would then, however, 
              be emperor. Omens were also reported from Rome: Nero in his latter 
              days was admonished in a dream to take the sacred chariot of Jupiter 
              Optimus Maximus from its shrine to the house of Vespasian and from 
              there to the Circus. Not long after this, too, when Galba was on 
              his way to the elections which gave him his second consulship, a 
              statue of the Deified Julius of its own accord turned towards the 
              East; and on the field of Betriacum, before the battle began, two 
              eagles fought in the sight of all, and when one was vanquished, 
              a third came from the direction of the rising sun and drove off 
              the victor. 6.       Yet 
              he made no move, although his followers were quite ready and even 
              urgent, until he was roused to it by the accidental support of men 
              unknown to him and at a distance. Two thousand soldiers of the three 
              legions that made up the army in Moesia had been sent to help Otho. 
              When word came to them after they had begun their march that he 
              had been defeated and had taken his own life, they none the less 
              kept on as far as Aquileia, because they did not believe the report. 
              There, taking advantage of the lawless state of the times, they 
              indulged in every kind of pillage; then, fearing that if they went 
              back, they would have to give an account and suffer punishment, 
              they took it into their heads to select and appoint an emperor, 
              saying that they were just as good as the Spanish army which had 
              appointed Galba, or the praetorian guard which had elected Otho, 
              or the German army which had chosen Vitellius. Accordingly the names 
              of all the consular governors who were serving anywhere were taken 
              up, and since objection was made to the rest for one reason or another, 
              while some members of the third legion, which had been transferred 
              from Syria to Moesia just before the death of Nero, highly commended 
              Vespasian, they unanimously agreed on him and forthwith inscribed 
              his name on all their banners. At the time, however, the movement 
              was checked and the soldiers recalled to their allegiance for a 
              season. But when their action became known, Tiberius Alexander, 
              prefect of Egypt, was the first to compel his legions to take the 
              oath for Vespasian on the Kalends of July, the day which was afterwards 
              celebrated as that of his accession; then the army in Judaea swore 
              allegiance to him personally on the fifth day before the Ides of 
              July.
                   The enterprise was greatly forwarded 
              by the circulation of a copy of a letter of the late emperor Otho 
              to Vespasian, whether genuine or forged, urging him with the utmost 
              earnestness to vengeance and expressing the hope that he would come 
              to the aid of his country; further, by a rumour which spread abroad 
              that Vitellius had planned, after his victory, to change the winter 
              quarters of the legions and to transfer those in Germany to the 
              Orient, to a safer and milder service; and finally, among the governors 
              of provinces, by the support of Licinius Mucianus, and among the 
              kings, by that of Vologaesus, the Parthian. The former, laying aside 
              the hostility with which up to that time jealousy had obviously 
              inspired him, promised the Syrian army; and the latter forty thousand 
              bowmen. 7.       Therefore 
              beginning a civil war and sending ahead generals with troops to 
              Italy, he crossed meanwhile to Alexandria, to take possession of 
              the key to Egypt. There he dismissed all his attendants and entered 
              the temple of Serapis alone, to consult the auspices as to the duration 
              of his power. And when after many propitiatory offerings to the 
              god he at length turned about, it seemed to him that his freedman 
              Basilides offered him sacred boughs, garlands, and loaves, as is 
              the custom there; and yet he knew well that no one had let him in, 
              and that for some time he had been hardly able to walk by reason 
              of rheumatism, and was besides far away. And immediately letters 
              came with the news that Vitellius had been routed at Cremona and 
              the emperor himself slain at Rome.
                   Vespasian as yet lacked prestige and a certain 
              divinity, so to speak, since he was an unexpected and still new-made 
              emperor; but these also were given him. A man of the people who 
              was blind, and another who was lame, came to him together as he 
              sat on the tribunal, begging for the help for their disorders which 
              Serapis had promised in a dream; for the god declared that Vespasian 
              would restore the eyes, if he would spit upon them, and give strength 
              to the leg, if he would deign to touch it with his heel. Though 
              he had hardly any faith that this could possibly succeed, and therefore 
              shrank even from making the attempt, he was at last prevailed upon 
              by his friends and tried both things in public before a large crowd; 
              and with success. At this same time, by the direction of certain 
              soothsayers, some vases of antique workmanship were dug up in a 
              consecrated spot at Tegea in Arcadia and on them was an image very 
              like Vespasian. 8.       Returning 
              to Rome under such auspices and attended by so great renown, after 
              celebrating a triumph over the Jews, he added eight consulships 
              to his former one; he also assumed the censorship and during the 
              whole period of his rule he considered nothing more essential than 
              first to strengthen the State, which was tottering and almost overthrown, 
              and then to embellish it as well.
                   The soldiery, some emboldened by their 
              victory and some resenting their humiliating defeat, had abandoned 
              themselves to every form of licence and recklessness; the provinces, 
              too, and the free cities, as well as some of the kingdoms, were 
              in a state of internal dissension. Therefore he discharged many 
              of the soldiers of Vitellius and punished many; but so far from 
              showing any special indulgence to those who had shared in his victory, 
              he was even tardy in paying them their lawful rewards. To let slip 
              no opportunity of improving military discipline, when a young man 
              reeking with perfumes came to thank him for a commission which had 
              been given him, Vespasian drew back his head in disgust, adding 
              the stern reprimand: "I would rather you had smelt of garlic"; 
              and he revoked the appointment. When the marines who march on foot 
              by turns from Ostia and Puteoli to Rome, asked that an alliance 
              be made them under the head of shoe money, not content with sending 
              them away without a reply, he ordered that in future they should 
              make the run barefooted; and they have done so ever since.
                   He made provinces of Achaia, Lycia, 
              Rhodes, Byzantium and Samos, taking away their freedom, and likewise 
              of Trachian Cilicia and Commagene, which up to that time had been 
              ruled by kings. He sent additional legions to Cappadocia because 
              of the constant inroads of the barbarians, and gave it a consular 
              governor in place of a Roman knight.
                   As the city was unsightly from former 
              fires and fallen buildings, he allowed anyone to take possession 
              of vacant sites and build upon them, in case the owners failed to 
              do so. He began the restoration of the Capitol in person, was the 
              first to lend a hand in clearing away the debris, and carried some 
              of it off on his own head. He undertook to restore the three thousand 
              bronze tablets which were destroyed with the temple, making a thorough 
              search for copies: priceless and most ancient records of the empire, 
              containing the decrees of the senate and the acts of the commons 
              almost from the foundation of the city, regarding alliances, treaties, 
              and special privileges granted to individuals. 9.       He 
              also undertook new works, the temple of Peace hard by the Forum 
              and one to the Deified Claudius on the Caelian mount, which was 
              begun by Agrippina, but almost utterly destroyed by Nero; also an 
              amphitheatre in the heart of the city, a plan which he learned that 
              Augustus had cherished.
                   He reformed the two great orders, 
              reduced by a series of murders and sullied by long standing neglect, 
              and added to their numbers, holding a review of the senate and the 
              knights, expelling those who least deserved the honour and enrolling 
              the most distinguished of the Italians and provincials. Furthermore, 
              to let it be known that the two orders differed from each other 
              not so much in their privileges as in their rank, in the case of 
              an altercation between a senator and a Roman knight, he rendered 
              his decision: "Unseemly language should not be used towards 
              senators, but to return their insults in kind is proper and lawful." 10.       Lawsuit 
              upon lawsuit had accumulated in all the courts to an excessive degree, 
              since those of long standing were left unsettled through the interruption 
              of court business and new ones had arisen through the disorder of 
              the times. He therefore chose commissioners by lot to restore what 
              had been seized in time of war, and to make special decisions in 
              the court of the Hundred, reducing the cases to the smallest number, 
              since it was clear that the lifetime of the litigants would not 
              suffice for the regular proceedings. 11.       Licentiousness 
              and extravagance had flourished without restraint; hence he induced 
              the senate to vote that any woman who formed a connection with the 
              slave of another person should herself be treated as a bond-woman; 
              also that those who lend money to minors should never have a legal 
              right to enforce payment, that is to say, not even after the death 
              of the fathers. 12.       In 
              other matters he was unassuming and lenient from the very beginning 
              of his reign until its end, never trying to conceal his former lowly 
              condition, but often even parading it. Indeed, when certain men 
              tried to trace the origin of the Flavian family to the founders 
              of Reate and a companion of Hercules whose tomb still stands on 
              the Via Salaria, he laughed at them for their pains. So far was 
              he from a desire for pomp and show, that on the day of his triumph, 
              he did not hesitate to say: "It serves me right for being such 
              a fool as to want a triumph in mythology old age, as if it were 
              due to my ancestors or had ever been among my own ambitions." 
              He did not even assume the tribunician power at once nor the title 
              of Father of his Country until late. As for the custom of searching 
              those who came to pay their morning calls, he gave that up before 
              the civil war was over. 13.       He 
              bore the frank language of his friends, the quips of pleaders, and 
              the impudence of the philosophers with the greatest patience. Though 
              Licinius Mucianus, a man of notorious unchastity, presumed upon 
              his services to treat Vespasian with scant respect, he never had 
              the heart to criticize him except privately and then only to the 
              extent of adding to a complaint made to a common friend, the significant 
              words: "I at least am a man." When Salvius Liberalis ventured 
              to say while defending a rich client, "What is it to Caesar 
              if Hipparchus had a hundred millions," he personally commended 
              him. When the Cynic Demetrius met him abroad after being condemned 
              to banishment, and without deigning to rise in his presence or to 
              salute him, even snarled out some insult, he merely called him "cur." 14.       He 
              was not inclined to remember or to avenge affronts or enmities, 
              but made a brilliant match for the daughter of his enemy Vitellius, 
              and even provided her with a dowry and a house-keeping outfit. When 
              he was in terror at being forbidden Nero's court, and asked what 
              on earth he was to do or where he was to go, one of the ushers put 
              him out and told him to "go to Morbovia"; but when the 
              man later begged for forgiveness, Vespasian confined his resentment 
              to words, and those of about the same number and purport. Indeed, 
              so far was he from being led by any suspicion or fear to cause anyone's 
              death, that when his friends warned him that he must keep an eye 
              on Mettius Pompusianus, since it was commonly believed that he had 
              an imperial horoscope, he even made him consul, guaranteeing that 
              he would one day be mindful of the favour. 15.       It 
              cannot readily be shown that any innocent person was punished save 
              in Vespasian's absence and without his knowledge, or at any rate 
              against his will and by misleading him. Although Helvidius Priscus 
              was the only one who greeted him on his return from Syria by his 
              private name of "Vespasian," and moreover in his praetorship 
              left the emperor unhonoured and unmentioned in all his edicts. He 
              did not show anger until by the extravagance of his railing Helvidius 
              had all but degraded him. But even in his case, though he did banish 
              him and later order his death, he was most anxious for any means 
              of saving him, and sent messengers to recall those who were to slay 
              him; and he would have saved him, but for a false report that Helvidius 
              had already been done to death. Certainly he never took pleasure 
              in the death of anyone, but even wept and sighed over those who 
              suffered merited punishment. 16.       The 
              only thing for which he can fairly be censured was his love of money. 
              For not content with reviving the imposts which had been repealed 
              under Galba, he added new and heavy burdens, increasing the amount 
              of tribute paid by the provinces, in some cases actually doubling 
              it, and quite openly carrying on traffic which would be shameful 
              even for a man in private life; for he would buy up certain commodities 
              merely in order to distribute them at a profit. He made no bones 
              of selling offices to candidates and acquittals to men under prosecution, 
              whether innocent or guilty. He is even believed to have had the 
              habit of designedly advancing the most rapacious of his procurators 
              to higher posts, that they might be the richer when he later condemned 
              them; in fact, it was common talk that he used these men as sponges, 
              because he, so to speak, soaked them when they were dry and squeezed 
              them when they were wet.
                   Some say that he was naturally covetous 
              and was taunted with it by an old herdsman of his, who on being 
              forced to pay for the freedom for which he earnestly begged Vespasian 
              when he became emperor, cried: "The fox changes his fur, but 
              not his nature." Others on the contrary believe that he was 
              driven by necessity to raise money by spoliation and robbery because 
              of the desperate state of the treasury and the privy purse; to which 
              he bore witness at the very beginning of his reign by declaring 
              that forty thousand millions were needed to set the State upright. 
              This latter view seems the more probable, since he made the best 
              use of his gains, ill-gotten though they were. 17.       He 
              was most generous to all classes, making up the requisite estate 
              for senators, giving needy ex-consuls an annual stipend of five 
              hundred thousand sesterces, restoring to a better condition many 
              cities throughout the empire which had suffered from earthquakes 
              or fires, and in particular encouraging men of talent and the arts. 18.       He 
              was the first to establish a regular salary of a hundred thousand 
              sesterces for Latin and Greek teachers of rhetoric, paid from the 
              privy purse. He also presented eminent poets with princely largess 
              and great rewards, and artists, too, such as the restorer of the 
              Venus of Cos and of the Colossus. To a mechanical engineer, who 
              promised to transport some heavy columns to the Capitol at small 
              expense, he gave no mean reward for his invention, but refused to 
              make use of it, saying: "You must let me feed my poor commons." 19.       At 
              the plays with which he dedicated the new stage of the theatre of 
              Marcellus he revived the old musical entertainments. To Apelles, 
              the tragic actor, he gave four hundred thousand sesterces; to Terpnus 
              and Diodorus, the lyre-players, two hundred thousand each; of several 
              a hundred thousand; while those who received least were paid forty 
              thousand, and numerous golden crowns were awarded besides. He gave 
              constant dinner-parties, too, usually formally and sumptuously, 
              to help the marketmen. He gave gifts to women on the Kalends of 
              March, as he did to the men on the Saturnalia.
                   Yet even so he could not be rid of 
              his former ill-repute for covetousness. The Alexandrians persisted 
              in calling him Cybiosactes, the surname of one of their kings who 
              was scandalously stingy. Even at his funeral, Favor, a leading actor 
              of mimes, who wore his mask and, according to the usual custom, 
              imitated the actions and words of the deceased during his lifetime, 
              having asked procurators in a loud voice how much his funeral procession 
              would cost, and hearing the reply "Ten million sesterces," 
              cried out: "Give me a hundred thousand and fling me even into 
              the Tiber." 20.       He 
              was well built, with strong, sturdy limbs, and the expression of 
              one who was straining. Apropos of which a witty fellow, when Vespasian 
              asked him to make a joke on him also, replied rather cleverly: "I 
              will, when you have finished relieving yourself." He enjoyed 
              excellent health, though he did nothing to keep it up except to 
              rub his throat and the other parts of his body a certain number 
              of times in the tennis court, and to fast one day in every month. 21.       This 
              was in general his manner of life. While emperor, he always rose 
              very early, in fact before daylight; then after reading his letters 
              and the reports of all the officials, he admitted his friends, and 
              while he was receiving their greetings, he put on his own shoes 
              and dressed himself. After despatching any business that came up, 
              he took time for a drive and then for a nap, lying with one of his 
              concubines, of whom he had taken several after the death of Caenis. 
              After his siesta he went to the bath and the dining-room; and it 
              is said that at no time was he more good-natured or indulgent, so 
              that the members of his household eagerly watched for these opportunities 
              of making requests. 22.       Not 
              only at dinner but on all other occasions he was most affable, and 
              he turned off many matters with a jest; for he was very ready with 
              sharp sayings, albeit of a low and buffoonish kind, so that he did 
              not even refrain from obscene expressions. Yet many of his remarks 
              are still remembered which are full of fine wit, and among them 
              the following. When an ex-consul called Mestrius Florus called his 
              attention to the fact that the proper pronunciation was plaustra 
              rather than plostra, he greeted him next day as "Flaurus." 
              When he was importuned by a woman, who said that she was dying for 
              love for him, he took her to his bed and gave her four hundred thousand 
              sesterces for her favours. Being asked by his steward how he would 
              have the sum entered in his accounts, he replied: "To a passion 
              for Vespasian." 23.       He 
              also quoted Greek verses with great timeliness, saying of a man 
              of tall stature and monstrous parts:                                        "Striding 
              along and waving a lance that casts a long shadow," and of the 
              freedman Cerylus, who was very rich, and to cheat the privy purse 
              of its dues at his death had begun to give himself out as freeborn, 
              changing his name to Laches:                                        "O 
              Laches, Laches,              
                                  
                                  
                                                                 When 
              you are dead, you'll change your name at once 
                                                     To 
              Cerylus again."      But 
              he particularly resorted to witticisms about his unseemly means 
              of gain, seeking to diminish their odium by some jocose saying and 
              to turn them into a jest. Having put off one of his favourite attendants, 
              who asked for a stewardship for a pretended brother, he summoned 
              the candidate himself, and after compelling him to pay him as much 
              money as he had agreed to give his advocate, appointed him to the 
              position without delay. On his attendant's taking up the matter 
              again, he said: "Find yourself another brother; the man that 
              you thought was yours is mine." On a journey, suspecting that 
              his muleteer had got down to shoe the mules merely to make delay 
              and give time for a man with a lawsuit to approach the emperor, 
              he asked how much he was paid for shoeing the mules and insisted 
              on a share of the money. When Titus found fault with him for contriving 
              a tax upon public conveniences, he held a piece of money from the 
              first payment to his son's nose, asking whether its odour was offensive 
              to him. When Titus said "No," he replied, "Yet it 
              comes from urine." On the report of a deputation that a colossal 
              statue of great cost had been voted him at public expense, he demanded 
              to have it set up at once, and holding out his open hand, said that 
              the base was ready. He did not cease his jokes even when in apprehension 
              of death and in extreme danger; for when among other portents the 
              Mausoleum opened on a sudden and a comet appeared in the heavens, 
              he declared that the former applied to Junia Calvina of the family 
              of Augustus, and the latter to the king of the Parthians, who wore 
              his hair long; and as death drew near, he said: "Woe's me. 
              Methinks I'm turning into a god." 24.       In 
              his ninth consulship he had a slight illness in Campania, and returning 
              at once to the city, he left for Cutiliae and the country about 
              Reate, where he spent the summer every year. There, in addition 
              to an increase in his illness, having contracted a bowel complaint 
              by too free use of the cold waters, he nevertheless continued to 
              perform his duties as emperor, even receiving embassies as he lay 
              in bed. Taken on a sudden with such an attack of diarrhoea that 
              he all but swooned, he said: "An emperor ought to die standing," 
              and while he was struggling to get on his feet, he died in the arms 
              of those who tried to help him, on the ninth day before the Kalends 
              of July, at the age of sixty-nine years, seven months and seven 
              days. 25.       All 
              agree that he had so much faith in his own horoscope and those of 
              his family, that even after constant conspiracies were made against 
              him he had the assurance to say to the senate that either his sons 
              would succeed him or he would have no successor. It is also said 
              that he once dreamed that he saw a balance with its beam on a level 
              placed in the middle of the vestibule of the Palace, in one pan 
              of which stood Claudius and Nero and in the other himself and his 
              sons. And the dream came true, since both houses reigned for the 
              same space of time and the same term of years.
