SUETONIUS THE 
            LIVES OF THE TWELVE CAESARS ~   THE 
            LIFE OF DOMITIAN   ~   1.       Domitian 
              was born on the ninth day before the Kalends of November of the 
              year when his father was consul elect and was about to enter on 
              the office in the following month, in a street of the sixth region 
              called "the Pomegranate," in a house which he afterwards 
              converted into a temple of the Flavian family. He is said to have 
              passed the period of his boyhood and his early youth in great poverty 
              and infamy. For he did not possess a single piece of plate and it 
              is a well known fact that Claudius Pollio, a man of praetorian rank, 
              against whom Nero's poem entitled "The One-eyed Man" is 
              directed, preserved a letter in Domitian's handwriting and sometimes 
              exhibited it, in which the future emperor promised him an assignation; 
              and there have not been wanting those who declared that Domitian 
              was also debauched by Nerva, who succeeded him. In the war with 
              Vitellius he took refuge in the Capitol with his paternal uncle 
              Sabinus and a part of the forces under him. When the enemy forced 
              an entrance and the temple was fired, he hid during the night with 
              the guardian of the shrine, and in the morning, disguised in the 
              garb of a follower of Isis and mingling with the priests of that 
              fickle superstition, he went across the Tiber with a single companion 
              to the mother of one of his school-fellows. There he was so effectually 
              concealed, that though he was closely followed, he could not be 
              found, in spite of a thorough search. It was only after the victory 
              that he ventured forth and after being hailed as Caesar, he assumed 
              the office of city praetor with consular powers, but only in name, 
              turning over all the judicial business to his next colleague. But 
              he exercised all the tyranny of his high position so lawlessly, 
              that it was even then apparent what sort of a man he was going to 
              be. Not to mention all details, after making free with the wives 
              of many men, he went so far as to marry Domitia Longina, who was 
              the wife of Aelius Lamia, and in a single day he assigned more than 
              twenty positions in the city and abroad, which led Vespasian to 
              say more than once that he was surprised that he did not appoint 
              the emperor's successor with the rest. 2.       He 
              began an expedition against Gaul and the Germanies, which was uncalled 
              for and from which his father's friends dissuaded him, merely that 
              he might make himself equal to his brother in power and rank. For 
              this he was reprimanded, and to give him a better realisation of 
              his youth and position, he had to live with his father, and when 
              they appeared in public he followed the emperor's chair and that 
              of his brother in a litter, while he also attended their triumph 
              over Judaea riding on a white horse. Moreover, of his six consulships 
              only one was a regular one, and he obtained that only because his 
              brother gave place to him and recommended his appointment.
                   He himself too made a remarkable pretence 
              of modesty and especially of an interest in poetry, an art which 
              had previously been as unfamiliar to him as it was later despised 
              and rejected, and he even gave readings in public. Yet in spite 
              of all this, when Vologaesus, king of the Parthians, had asked for 
              auxiliaries against the Alani and for one of Vespasian's sons as 
              their leader, Domitian used every effort to have himself sent rather 
              than Titus; and because the affair came to nothing, he tried by 
              gifts and promises to induce other eastern kings to make the same 
              request.
                   On the death of his father he hesitated 
              for some time whether to offer a double largess to the soldiers, 
              and he never had any compunction about saying that he had been left 
              a partner in the imperial power, but that the will had been tampered 
              with. And from that time on he never ceased to plot against his 
              brother secretly and openly, until Titus was seized with a dangerous 
              illness, when Domitian ordered that he be left for dead, before 
              he had actually drawn his last breath. And after his death he bestowed 
              no honour upon him, save that of deification, and he often assailed 
              his memory in ambiguous phrases, both in his speeches and in his 
              edicts. 3.       At 
              the beginning of his reign he used to spend hours in seclusion every 
              day, doing nothing but catch flies and stab them with a keenly-sharpened 
              stylus. Consequently when someone once asked whether anyone was 
              in there with Caesar, Vibius Crispus made the witty reply: "Not 
              even a fly." Then he saluted his wife Domitia as Augusta. He 
              had had a son by her in his second consulship, whom he lost the 
              second year after he became emperor; he divorced her because of 
              her love for the actor Paris, but could not bear the separation 
              and soon took her back, alleging that the people demanded it.
                   In his administration of the government 
              he for some time showed himself inconsistent, with about an equal 
              number of virtues and vices, but finally he turned the virtues also 
              into vices; for so far as one may guess, it was contrary to his 
              natural disposition that he was made rapacious through need and 
              cruel through fear. 4.       He 
              constantly gave grand costly entertainments, both in the amphitheatre 
              and in the Circus, where in addition to the usual races between 
              two-horse and four-horse chariots, he also exhibited two battles, 
              one between forces of infantry and the other by horsemen; and he 
              even gave a naval battle in the amphitheatre. Besides he gave hunts 
              of wild beasts, gladiatorial shows at night by the light of torches, 
              and not only combats between men but between women as well. He was 
              always present too at the games given by the quaestors, which he 
              revived after they had been abandoned for some time, and invariably 
              granted the people the privilege of calling for two pairs of gladiators 
              from his own school, and brought them in last in all the splendour 
              of the court. During the whole of every gladiatorial show there 
              always stood at his feet a small boy clad in scarlet, with an abnormally 
              small head, with whom he used to talk a great deal, and sometimes 
              seriously. At any rate, he was overheard to ask him if he knew why 
              he had decided at the last appointment day to make Mettius Rufus 
              praefect of Egypt. He often gave sea-fights almost with regular 
              fleets, having dug a pool near the Tiber and surrounded it with 
              seats; and he continued to witness the contests amid heavy rains.
                   He also celebrated Secular games, 
              reckoning the time, not according to the year when Claudius had 
              last given them, but by the previous calculation of Augustus. In 
              the course of these, to make it possible to finish a hundred races 
              on the day of contests in the Circus, he diminished the number of 
              laps from seven to five.
                   He also established a quinquennial 
              contest in honour of Jupiter Capitolinus of a threefold character, 
              comprising music, riding, and gymnastics, and with considerably 
              more prizes than are awarded nowadays. For there were competitions 
              in prose declamation both in hand and in Latin; and in addition 
              to those of the lyre-players, between choruses of such players and 
              in the lyre alone, without singing; while in the stadium there were 
              races even between maidens. He presided at the competitions in half-boots, 
              clad in a purple toga in the Greek fashion, and wearing upon his 
              head a golden crown, and wearing upon his head a golden crown with 
              figures of Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, while by his side sat the 
              priest of Jupiter and the college of the Flaviales, similarly dressed, 
              except that their crowns bore his image as well. He celebrated the 
              Quinquatria too every year in honour of Minerva at his Alban villa, 
              and established for her a college of priests, from which men were 
              chosen by lot to act as officers and give splendid shows of wild 
              beasts and stage plays, besides holding contests in oratory and 
              poetry.
                   He made a present to the people of 
              three hundred sesterces each on three occasions, and in the course 
              of one of his shows in celebration of the feast of the Seven Hills 
              gave a plentiful banquet, distributing large baskets of victuals 
              to the senate and knights, and smaller one to the commons; and he 
              himself was the first to begin to eat. On the following day he scattered 
              gifts of all sorts of things to be scrambled for, and since the 
              greater part of these fell where the people sat, he had five hundred 
              tickets thrown into each section occupied by the senatorial and 
              equestrian orders. 5.       He 
              restored many splendid buildings which had been destroyed by fire, 
              among them the Capitolium, which had again been burned, but in all 
              cases with the inscription of his own name only, and with no mention 
              of the original builder. Furthermore, he built a new temple on the 
              Capitoline hill in honour of Jupiter Custos and the forum which 
              now bears the name of Nerva; likewise a temple to the Flavian family, 
              a stadium, an Odeum, and a pool for sea-fights. From the stone used 
              in this last the Circus Maximus was afterwards rebuilt, when both 
              sides of it had been destroyed by fire. 6.       His 
              campaigns he undertook partly without provocation and partly of 
              necessity. That against the Chatti was uncalled for, while the one 
              against the Sarmatians was justified by the destruction of a legion 
              with its commander. He made two against the Dacians, the first when 
              Oppius Sabinus an ex-consul was defeated, and the second on the 
              overthrow of Cornelius Fuscus, perfect of the praetorian guard, 
              to whom he had entrusted the conduct of the war. After several battles 
              of varying success he celebrated a double triumph over the Chatti 
              and the Dacians. His victories over the Sarmatians he commemorated 
              merely by the offering of a laurel crown to Jupiter of the Capitol.
                   A civil war which was set on foot 
              by Lucius Antonius, governor of Upper Germany, was put down in the 
              emperor's absence by a remarkable stroke of good fortune; for at 
              the very hour of battle the Rhine suddenly thawed and prevented 
              his barbarian allies from crossing over to Antonius. Domitian learned 
              of this victory through omens before he actually had news of it, 
              for on the very day when the decisive battle was fought a magnificent 
              eagle enfolded his statue at Rome with its wings, uttering exultant 
              shrieks; and soon afterwards the report of Antony's death became 
              so current, that several went so far as to assert positively that 
              they had seen his head brought to Rome. 7.       He 
              made many innovations also in common customs. He did away with the 
              distribution of food to the people and revived that of formal dinners. 
              He added two factions of drivers in the Circus, with gold and purple 
              as their colours, to the four former ones. He forbade the appearance 
              of actors on the stage, but allowed the practice of their art in 
              private houses. He prohibited the castration of males, and kept 
              down the price of the eunuchs that remained in the hands of the 
              slave dealers. Once upon the occasion of a plentiful wine crop, 
              attended with a scarcity of grain, thinking that the fields were 
              neglected through too much attention to the vineyards, he made an 
              edict forbidding anyone to plant more vines in Italy and ordering 
              that the vineyards in the provinces be cut down, or but half of 
              them at most be left standing; but he did not persist in carrying 
              out the measure. He opened some of the most important offices of 
              the court to freedmen and Roman knights. He prohibited the uniting 
              of two legions in one camp and the deposit of more than a thousand 
              sesterces by any one soldier at headquarters, because it was clear 
              that Lucius Antonius had been especially led to attempt a revolution 
              by the amount of such deposits in the combined winter quarters of 
              two legions. He increased the pay of the soldiers one fourth, by 
              the addition of three gold pieces each year. 8.       He 
              administered justice scrupulously and conscientiously, frequently 
              holding special sittings on the tribunal in the Forum. He rescinded 
              such decisions of the Hundred Judges as were made from interested 
              motives. He often warned the arbiters not to grant claims for freedom 
              made under false pretences. He degraded jurors who accepted bribes, 
              together with all their associates. He also induced the tribunes 
              of the commons to prosecute a corrupt aedile for extortion, and 
              to ask the senate to appoint jurors in the case. He took such care 
              to exercise restraint over the city officials and the governors 
              of the provinces, that at no time were they more honest or just, 
              whereas after his time we have seen many of them charged with all 
              manner of offences. Having undertaken the correction of public morals, 
              he put an end to the licence at the theatres, where the general 
              public occupied the seats reserved for the knights; did away with 
              the prevailing publication of scurrilous lampoons, in which distinguished 
              men and women were attacked, and imposed ignominious penalties on 
              their authors; expelled an ex-quaestor from the senate, because 
              he was given to acting and dancing; deprived notorious women of 
              the use of litters, as well as of the right to receive inheritances 
              and legacies; struck the name of a Roman knight from the list of 
              jurors, because he had taken back his wife after divorcing her and 
              charging her with adultery; condemned several men of both orders, 
              offenders against the Scantinian law; and the incest of Vestal virgins, 
              condoned even by his father and his brother, he punished severely 
              in divers ways, at first by capital punishment, and afterwards in 
              the ancient fashion. For while he allowed the sisters Oculata and 
              also Varronilla free choice of the manner of their death, and banished 
              their paramours, he later ordered that Cornelia, a chief-vestal 
              who had been acquitted once but after a long interval again arraigned 
              and found guilty, be buried alive; and her lovers were beaten to 
              death with rods in the Comitium, with the exception of an ex-praetor, 
              whom he allowed to go into exile, because he admitted his guilt 
              while the case was still unsettled and the examination and torture 
              of the witnesses had led to no result. To protect the gods from 
              being dishonoured with impunity by any sacrilege, he caused a tomb 
              which one of his freedmen had built for his son from stones intended 
              for the temple of Jupiter of the Capitol to be destroyed by the 
              soldiers and the bones and ashes contained in it thrown into the 
              sea. 9.       In 
              the earlier part of his reign he so shrank from any form of bloodshed, 
              that while his father was still absent from the city, he planned 
              to issue an edict that no oxen should be offered up, recalling the 
              line of Vergil, "E'er 
              yet an impious race did slay and feat upon bullocks."      He 
              was equally free from any suspicion of love of gain or of avarice, 
              both in private life and for some time after becoming emperor; on 
              the contrary, he often gave strong proofs not merely of integrity, 
              but even of liberality. He treated all his intimates most generously, 
              and there was nothing which he urged them more frequently, or with 
              greater insistence, than that they should be niggardly in none of 
              their acts. He would not accept inheritances left him by those who 
              had children. He even annulled a legacy in the will of Rustus Caepio, 
              who had provided that his heir should yearly pay a specified sum 
              to each of the senators on his entrance into the House. He cancelled 
              the suits against those who had been posted as debtors to the public 
              treasury for more than five years, and would not allow a renewal 
              except within a year and on the condition that an accuser who did 
              not win his suit should be punished with exile. Scribes of the quaestors 
              who carried on business, which had become usual although contrary 
              to the Clodian law, he pardoned for past offences. Parcels of land 
              which were left unoccupied here and there after the assignment of 
              lands to the veterans he granted to their former owners as by right 
              of possession. He checked false accusations designed for the profit 
              of the privy purse and inflicted severe penalties on offenders; 
              and a saying of his was current, that an emperor who does not punish 
              informers hounds them on. 10.       But 
              he did not continue this course of mercy or integrity, although 
              he turned to cruelty somewhat more speedily than to avarice. He 
              put to death a pupil of the pantomimic actor Paris, who was still 
              a beardless boy and ill at the time, because in his skill and his 
              appearance he seemed not unlike his master; also Hermogenes of Tarsus 
              because of some allusions in his History, besides crucifying even 
              the slaves who had written it out. A householder who said that a 
              Thracian gladiator was a match for the murmillo, but not 
              for the giver of the games, he caused to be dragged from his seat 
              and thrown into the arena to dogs, with this placard: "A favourer 
              of the Thracians who spoke impiously."
                   He put to death many senators, among 
              them several ex-consuls, including Civica Cerealis, at the very 
              time when he was proconsul in Asia, Salvidienus Orfitus, Acilius 
              Glabrio while he was in exile — these on the ground of plotting 
              revolution, the rest on any charge, however trivial. He slew Aelius 
              Lamia for joking remarks, which were reflections on him, it is true, 
              but made long before and harmless. For when Domitian had taken away 
              Lamia's wife, the latter replied to someone who praised his voice: 
              "I practise continence"; and when Titus urged him to marry 
              again, he replied: "Are you too looking for a wife?" He 
              put to death Salvius Cocceianus, because he had kept the birthday 
              of the emperor Otho, his paternal uncle; Mettius Pompusianus, because 
              it was commonly reported that he had an imperial nativity and carried 
              about a map of the world on parchment and speeches of the kings 
              and generals from Titus Livius, besides giving two of his slaves 
              the names of Mago and Hannibal; Sallustius Lucullus, governor of 
              Britain, for allowing some lances of a new pattern to be named "Lucullean," 
              after his own name; Junius Rusticus, because he had published eulogies 
              of Paetus Thrasea and Helvidius Priscus and called them the most 
              upright of men; and on the occasion of this charge he banished all 
              the philosophers from the city and from Italy. He also executed 
              the younger Helvidius, alleging that in a farce composed for the 
              stage he had under the characters of Paris and Oenone censured Domitian's 
              divorce from his wife; Flavius Sabinus too, one of his cousins, 
              because on the day of the consular elections the crier had inadvertently 
              announced him to the people as emperor elect, instead of consul.
                   After his victory in the civil war 
              he became even more cruel, and to discover any conspirators who 
              were in hiding, tortured many of the opposite party by a new form 
              of inquisition, inserting fire in their privates; and he cut off 
              the hands of some of them. It is certain that of the more conspicuous 
              only two were pardoned, a tribune of senatorial rank and a centurion, 
              who the more clearly to prove their freedom from guilt, showed that 
              they were of shameless unchastity and could therefore have had no 
              influence with the general or with the soldiers. 11.       His 
              savage cruelty was not only excessive, but also cunning and sudden. 
              He invited one of his stewards to his bed-chamber the day before 
              crucifying him, made him sit beside him on his couch, and dismissed 
              him in a secure and gay frame of mind, even deigning to send him 
              a share of his dinner. When he was on the point of condemning the 
              ex-consul Arrecinius Clemens, one of his intimates and tools, he 
              treated him with as great favour as before, if not greater, and 
              finally, as he was taking a drive with him, catching sight of his 
              accuser he said: "Pray, shall we hear this base slave to-morrow?"
                   To abuse men's patience the more insolently, 
              he never pronounced an unusually dreadful sentence without a preliminary 
              declaration of clemency, so that there came to be no more certain 
              indication of a cruel death than the leniency of his preamble. He 
              had brought some men charged with treason into the senate, and when 
              he had introduced the matter by saying that he would find out that 
              day how dear he was to the members, he had no difficulty in causing 
              them to be condemned to suffer the ancient method of punishment. 
              Then appalled at the cruelty of the penalty, he interposed a veto, 
              to lessen the odium, in these words (for it will be of interest 
              to know his exact language): "Allow me, Fathers of the senate, 
              to prevail on you by your love for me to grant a favour which I 
              know I shall obtain with difficulty, namely that you allow the condemned 
              free choice of the manner of their death; for thus you will spare 
              your own eyes and all men will know that I was present at the meeting 
              of the senate." 12.       Reduced 
              to financial straits by the cost of his buildings and shows, as 
              well as by the additions which he had made to the pay of the soldiers, 
              he tried to lighten the military expenses by diminishing the number 
              of his troops; but perceiving that in this way he exposed himself 
              to the attacks of the barbarians, and nevertheless had difficulty 
              in easing his burdens, he had no hesitation in resorting to every 
              sort of robbery. The property of the living and the dead was seized 
              everywhere on any charge brought by any accuser. It was enough to 
              allege any action or word derogatory to the majesty of the prince. 
              Estates of those in no way connected with him were confiscated, 
              if but one man came forward to declare that he had heard from the 
              deceased during his lifetime that Caesar was his heir. Besides other 
              taxes, that on the Jews was levied with the utmost rigour, and those 
              were prosecuted who without publicly acknowledging that faith yet 
              lived as Jews, as well as those who concealed their origin and did 
              not pay the tribute levied upon their people. I recall being present 
              in my youth when the person of a man ninety years old was examined 
              before the procurator and a very crowded court, to see whether he 
              was circumcised.
                   From his youth he was far from being 
              of an affable disposition, but was on the contrary presumptuous 
              and unbridled both in act and in word. When his father's concubine 
              Caenis returned from Histria and offered to kiss him as usual, he 
              held out his hand to her. He was vexed that his brother's son-in‑law 
              had attendants clad in white, as well as he, and uttered the words "Not 
              good is a number of rulers." 13.       When 
              he became emperor, he did not hesitate to boast in the senate that 
              he had conferred their power on both his father and his brother, 
              and that they had but returned him his own; nor on taking back his 
              wife after their divorce, that he had "recalled her to his 
              divine couch." He delighted to hear the people in the amphitheatre 
              shout on his feast day: "Good Fortune attend our Lord and Mistress." 
              Even more, in the Capitoline competition, when all the people begged 
              him with great unanimity to restore Palfurius Sura, who had been 
              banished some time before from the senate, and on that occasion 
              received the prize for oratory, he deigned no reply, but merely 
              had a crier bid them be silent. With no less arrogance he began 
              as follows in issuing a circular letter in the name of his procurators, 
              "Our Master and our God bids that this be done." And so 
              the custom arose of henceforth addressing him in no other way even 
              in writing or in conversation. He suffered no statues to be set 
              up in his honour in the Capitol, except of gold and silver and of 
              a fixed weight. He erected so many and such huge vaulted passage-ways 
              and arches in the various regions of the city, adorned with chariots 
              and triumphal emblems, that on one of them someone wrote in Greek: 
              "It is enough." He held the consulship seventeen times, 
              more often than any of his predecessors. Of these the seven middle 
              ones were in successive years, but all of them he filled in name 
              only, continuing none beyond the first of May and few after the 
              Ides of January. Having assumed the surname Germanicus after his 
              two triumphs, he renamed the months of September and October from 
              his own names, calling them "Germanicus" and "Domitianus," 
              because in the former he had come to the throne and was born in 
              the latter. 14.       In 
              this way he became an object of terror and hatred to all, but he 
              was overthrown at last by a conspiracy of his friends and favourite 
              freedmen, to which his wife was also privy. He had long since had 
              a premonition of the last year and day of his life, and even of 
              the very hour and manner of his death. In his youth astrologers 
              had predicted all this to him, and his father once even openly ridiculed 
              him at dinner for refusing mushrooms, saying that he showed himself 
              unaware of his destiny in not rather fearing the sword. Therefore 
              he was at all times timorous and worried, and was disquieted beyond 
              measure by even the slightest suspicions. It is thought that nothing 
              had more effect in inducing him to ignore his proclamation about 
              cutting down the vineyards than the circulation of notes containing 
              the following lines:                               "Gnaw 
              at my root, an you will; even then shall I have juice in plenty 
              
                                            To 
              pour upon thee, O goat, when at the altar you stand."      It 
              was because of this same timorousness that although he was most 
              eager for all such honours, he refused a new one which the senate 
              had devised and offered to him, a decree, namely, that whenever 
              he held the consulship Roman knights selected by lot should precede 
              him among his lictors and attendants, clad in the trabea 
              and bearing lances.
                   As the time when he anticipated danger drew 
              near, becoming still more anxious every day, he lined the walls 
              of the colonnades in which he used to walk with phengite stone, 
              to be able to see in its brilliant surface the reflection of all 
              that went on behind his back. And he did not give a hearing to any 
              prisoners except in private and alone, even holding their chains 
              in his hands. Further, to convince his household that one must not 
              venture to kill a patron even on good grounds, he condemned Epaphroditus, 
              his confidential secretary, to death, because it was believed that 
              after Nero was abandoned the freedman's hand had aided him in taking 
              his life. 15.       Finally 
              he put to death his own cousin Flavius Clemens, suddenly and on 
              a very slight suspicion, almost before the end of his consulship; 
              and yet Flavius was a man of most contemptible laziness and Domitian 
              had besides openly named his sons, who were then very young, as 
              his successors, changing their former names and calling the one 
              Vespasian and the other Domitian. And it was by this deed in particular 
              that he hastened his own destruction.
                   For eight successive months so many 
              strokes of lightning occurred and were reported, that at last he 
              cried: "Well, let him now strike whom he will." The temple 
              of Jupiter of the Capitol was struck and that of the Flavian family, 
              as well as the Palace and the emperor's own bedroom. The inscription 
              too on the base of a triumphal statue of his was torn off in a violent 
              tempest and fell upon a neighbouring tomb. The tree which had been 
              overthrown when Vespasian was still a private citizen but had sprung 
              up anew, then on a sudden fell down again. Fortune of Praeneste 
              had throughout his whole reign, when he commended the new year to 
              her protection, given him a favourable omen and always in the same 
              words. Now at last she returned a most direful one, not without 
              the mention of bloodshed.
                   He dreamed that Minerva, whom he worshipped 
              with superstitious veneration, came forth from her shrine and declared 
              that she could no longer protect him, since she had been disarmed 
              by Jupiter. Yet there was nothing by which he was so much disturbed 
              as a prediction of the astrologer Ascletarion and what befell him. 
              When this man was accused before the emperor and did not deny that 
              he had spoken of certain things which he had foreseen through his 
              art, he was asked what his own end would be. When he replied that 
              he would shortly be rent by dogs, Domitian ordered him killed at 
              once; but to prove the fallibility of his art, he ordered besides 
              that his funeral be attended to with the greatest care. While this 
              was being done, it chanced that the pyre was overset by a sudden 
              storm and that the dogs mangled the corpse, which was only partly 
              consumed; and that an actor of farces called Latinus, who happened 
              to pass by and see the incident, told it to Domitian at the dinner 
              table, with the rest of the day's gossip. 16.       The 
              day before he was killed he gave orders to have some apples which 
              were offered him kept until the following day, and added: "If 
              only I am spared to eat them"; then turning to his companions, 
              he declared that on the following day the moon would be stained 
              with blood in Aquarius, and that a deed would be done of which men 
              would talk all over the world. At about midnight he was so terrified 
              that he leaped from his bed. The next morning he conducted the trial 
              of a soothsayer sent from Germany, who when consulted about the 
              lightning strokes had foretold a change of rulers, and condemned 
              him to death. While he was vigorously scratching a festered wart 
              on his forehead, and had drawn blood, he said: "May this be 
              all." Then he asked the time, and by pre-arrangement the sixth 
              hour was announced to him, instead of the fifth, which he feared. 
              Filled with joy at this, and believing all danger now past, he was 
              hastening to the bath, when his chamberlain Parthenius changed his 
              purpose by announcing that someone had called about a matter of 
              great moment and would not be put off. Then he dismissed all his 
              attendants and went to his bedroom, where he was slain. 17.       Concerning 
              the nature of the plot and the manner of his death, this is about 
              all that became known. As the conspirators were deliberating when 
              and how to attack him, whether at the bath or at dinner, Stephanus, 
              Domitilla's steward, at the time under accusation for embezzlement, 
              offered his aid and counsel. To avoid suspicion, he wrapped up his 
              left arm in woollen bandages for some days, pretending that he had 
              injured it, and concealed in them a dagger. Then pretending to betray 
              a conspiracy and for that reason being given an audience, he stabbed 
              the emperor in the groin as he was reading a paper which the assassin 
              handed him, and stood in a state of amazement. As the wounded prince 
              attempted to resist, he was slain with seven wounds by Clodianus, 
              a subaltern, Maximus, a freedman of Parthenius, Satur, decurion 
              of the chamberlains, and a gladiator from the imperial school. A 
              boy who was engaged in his usual duty of attending to the Lares 
              in the bedroom, and so was a witness of the murder, gave this additional 
              information. He was bidden by Domitian, immediately after he was 
              dealt the first blow, to hand him the dagger hidden under his pillow 
              and to call the servants; but he found nothing at the head of the 
              bed save the hilt, and besides all the doors were closed. Meanwhile 
              the emperor grappled with Stephanus and bore him to the ground, 
              where they struggled for a long time, Domitian trying now to wrest 
              the dagger from his assailant's hands and now to gouge out his eyes 
              with his lacerated fingers.
                   He was slain on the fourteenth day 
              before the Kalends of October in the forty-fifth year of his age 
              and the fifteenth of his reign. His corpse was carried out on a 
              common bier by those who bury the poor, and his nurse Phyllis cremated 
              it at her suburban estate on the Via Latina; but his ashes she secretly 
              carried to the temple of the Flavian family and mingled them with 
              those of Julia, daughter of Titus, whom she had also reared. 18.       He 
              was tall of stature, with a modest expression and a high colour. 
              His eyes were large, but his sight was somewhat dim. He was handsome 
              and graceful too, especially when a young man, and indeed in his 
              whole body with the exception of his feet, the toes of which were 
              somewhat cramped. In later life he had the further disfigurement 
              of baldness, a protruding belly, and spindling legs, though the 
              latter had become thin from a long illness. He was so conscious 
              that the modesty of his expression was in his favour, that he once 
              made this boast in the senate: "So far, at any rate, you have 
              approved my heart and my countenance." He was so sensitive 
              about his baldness, that he regarded it as a personal insult if 
              anyone else was twitted with that defect in jest or in earnest; 
              though in a book "On the Care of the Hair," which he published 
              and dedicated to a friend, he wrote the following by way of consolation 
              to the man and himself: "Do 
              you not see that I am too tall and comely to look on?      And 
              yet the same fate awaits my hair, and I bear with resignation the 
              ageing of my locks in youth. Be assured that nothing is more pleasing 
              than beauty, but nothing shorter-lived." 19.       He 
              was incapable of exertion and seldom went about the city on foot, 
              while on his campaigns and journeys he rarely rode on horseback, 
              but was regularly carried in a litter. He took no interest in arms, 
              but was particularly devoted to archery. There are many who have 
              more than once seen him slay a hundred wild beasts of different 
              kinds on his Alban estate, and purposely kill some of them with 
              two successive shots in such a way that the arrows gave the effect 
              of horns. Sometimes he would have a slave stand at a distance and 
              hold out the palm of his right hand for a mark, with the fingers 
              spread; then he directed his arrows with such accuracy that they 
              passed harmlessly between the fingers. 20.       At 
              the beginning of his rule he neglected liberal studies, although 
              he provided for having the libraries, which were destroyed by fire, 
              renewed at very great expense, seeking everywhere for copies of 
              the lost works, and sending scribes to Alexandria to transcribe 
              and correct them. Yet he never took any pains to become acquainted 
              with history or poetry, or even to acquiring an ordinarily good 
              style. He read nothing except the memoirs and transactions of Tiberius 
              Caesar; for his letters, speeches and proclamations he relied on 
              others' talents. Yet his conversation was not inelegant, and some 
              of his sayings were even noteworthy. "How I wish," said 
              he, "that I were as fine looking as Maecius thinks he is." 
              He declared too that the head of a certain man, whose hair had changed 
              colour in such a way that it was partly reddish and partly grey, 
              was like "snow on which mead had been poured." 21.       He 
              used to say that the lot of princes was most unhappy, since when 
              they discovered a conspiracy, no one believed them unless they had 
              been killed.
                   Whenever he had leisure he amused 
              himself with playing at dice, even on working days and in the morning 
              hours. He went to the bath before the end of the forenoon and lunched 
              to the point of satiety, so that at dinner he rarely took anything 
              except a Matian apple and a moderate amount of wine from a jug. 
              He gave numerous and generous banquets, but usually ended them early; 
              in no case did he protract them beyond sunset, or follow them by 
              a drinking bout. In fact, he did nothing until the hour for retiring 
              except walk alone in a retired place. 22.       He 
              was excessively lustful. His constant sexual intercourse he called 
              bed-wrestling, as if it were a kind of exercise. It was reported 
              that he depilated his concubines with his own hand and swam with 
              common prostitutes. After persistently refusing his niece, who was 
              offered him in marriage when she was still a maid, because he was 
              entangled in an intrigue with Domitia, he seduced her shortly afterwards 
              when she became the wife of another, and that too during the lifetime 
              of Titus. Later, when she was bereft of father and husband, he loved 
              her ardently and without disguise, and even became the cause of 
              her death by compelling her to get rid of a child of his by abortion. 23.       The 
              people received the news of his death with indifference, but the 
              soldiers were greatly grieved and at once attempted to call him 
              the Deified Domitian; while they were prepared also to avenge him, 
              had they not lacked leaders. This, however, they did accomplish 
              a little later by most insistently demanding the execution of his 
              murderers. The senators on the contrary were so overjoyed, that 
              they raced to fill the House, where they did not refrain from assailing 
              the dead emperor with the most insulting and stinging kind of outcries. 
              They even had ladders brought and his shields and images torn down 
              before their eyes and dashed upon the ground; finally they passed 
              a decree that his inscriptions should everywhere be erased, and 
              all record of him obliterated.
                   A few months before he was killed, 
              a raven perched on the Capitolium and cried "All will be well," 
              an omen which some interpreted as follows:                                        "High 
              on the gable Tarpeian a raven but lately alighting, 
                                                     Could 
              not say 'It is well,' only declared 'It will be.' "      Domitian 
              himself, it is said, dreamed that a golden hump grew out on his 
              back, and he regarded this as an infallible sign that the condition 
              of the empire would be happier and more prosperous after his time; 
              and this was shortly shown to be true through the uprightness and 
              moderate rule of the succeeding emperors.
